docs/schema_ref.rst, before:

==============================
Schema Configuration Reference
==============================

Every project in PySemantic can be configured via a data dictionary or a
schema, which is a yaml file. This file houses the details of how PySemantic
should treat a project's constituent datasets. A typical data dictionary
follows the following pattern:

.. code-block:: yaml

  dataset_name:
    dataset_param_1: value1
    dataset_param_2: value2
    # etc

PySemantic reads this as a dictionary where the parameter names are keys and
their values are the values in the dictionary. Thus, the schema for a whole
project is a dictionary of dictionaries.

--------------------------
Basic Schema Configuration
--------------------------

Here is a list of different dataset parameters that PySemantic is sensitive
to:

* ``path`` (Required) The absolute path to the file containing the data. Note that the path must be absolute. This can also be a list of files if the dataset spans multiple files. If that is the case, the path parameter can be specified as:

.. code-block:: yaml

  path:
    - absolulte/path/to/file/1
    - absolulte/path/to/file/2
    # etc

* ``demlimiter`` (Optional, default: ``,``) The delimiter used in the file. This has to be a character delimiter, not words like "comma" or "tab".

* ``md5`` (Optional) The MD5 checksum of the file to read. This necessary
  because sometimes we read files and after processing it, rewrite to the same
  path. This parameter helps keep track of whether the file is correct.

* ``header``: (Optional) The header row of the file.

* ``column_names``: (Optional) Specify the names of columns to use in the
  loaded dataframe. This option can have multiple types of values. It can be:

    1. A list of strings to use as column names:

    .. code-block:: yaml

      column_names:
        - column_1
        - column_2
        - column_3

    2. A dictionary that maps original column names to new ones:

    .. code-block:: yaml

      column_names:
        org_colname_1: new_colname_a
        org_colname_2: new_colname_b
        org_colname_3: new_colname_c

    3. A Python function that translates the name of every column in the loaded
       dataframe:

    .. code-block:: yaml

      column_names: !!python/name:module_name.translate_column_name

* ``nrows``: (Optional) Number of rows to read from the file. If not specified, all rows from the file are read.

* ``use_columns``: (Optional) The list of the columns to read from the dataset. The format for specifying this parameter is as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

    use_columns:
      - column_1
      - column_2
      - column_3

If this parameter is not specified, all columns present in the dataset are read.

* ``converters``: A dictionary of functions to be applied to columns when loading data. Any Python callable can be added to this list. This parameter makes up the ``converters`` argument of Pandas parsers. The usage is as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

    converters:
      col_a: !!python/name:numpy.int

This results in the ``numpy.int`` function being called on the column ``col_a``

* ``dtypes`` (Optional) Data types of the columns to be read. Since types in Python are native objects, PySemantic expects them to be so in the schema. This can be formatted as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

  dtypes:
    column_name: !!python/name:python_object

For example, if you have three columns named ``foo``, ``bar``, and ``baz``,
which have the types ``string``, ``integer`` and ``float`` respectively, then your schema
should look like:

.. code-block:: yaml

  dtypes:
    foo: !!python/name:__builtin__.str
    bar: !!python/name:__builtin__.int
    baz: !!python/name:__builtin__.float

Non-builtin types can be specified too:

.. code-block:: yaml

   dtypes:
     datetime_column: !!python/name:datetime.date

*Note*: You can figure out the yaml representation of a Python type by doing
the following:

.. code-block:: python

  import yaml
  x = type(foo) # where foo is the object who's type is to be yamlized
  print yaml.dump(x)

* ``combine_dt_columns`` (Optional) Columns containing Date/Time values can be combined into one column by using the following schema:

.. code-block:: yaml

  combine_dt_columns:
    output_col_name:
      - col_a
      - col_b

This will parse columns ``col_a`` and ``col_b`` as datetime columns, and put the result in a column named ``output_col_name``. Specifying the output name is optional. You may declare the schema as:

.. code-block:: yaml

  combine_dt_columns:
    - col_a
    - col_b

In this case the parser will simply name the output column as ``col_a_col_b``, as is the default with Pandas.

*NOTE*: Specifying this column will make PySemantic ignore any columns that have been declared as having the datetime type in the ``dtypes`` parameter.

----------------------------
Column Schema Configuration
----------------------------

PySemantic also allows specifying rules and validators independently for each
column. This can be done using the ``column_rules`` parameter of the dataset
schema. Here is a typical format:

.. code-block:: yaml

  dataset_name:
    column_rules:
      column_1_name:
        # rules to be applied to the column
      column_2_name:
        # rules to be applied to the column

The following parameters can be supplied to any column under ``column_rules``:

* ``is_drop_na`` ([true|false], default false) Setting this to ``true`` causes PySemantic to drop all NA values in the column.
* ``is_drop_duplicates`` ([true|false], default false) Setting this to ``true`` causes PySemantic to drop all duplicated values in the column.
* ``unique_values``: These are the unique values that are expected in a column. The value of this parameter has to be a yaml list. Any value not found in this list will be dropped when cleaning the dataset.
* ``exclude``: These are the values that are to be explicitly excluded from the column. This comes in handy when a column has too many unique values, and a handful of them have to be dropped.
* ``minimum``: Minimum value allowed in a column if the column holds numerical data. By default, the minimum is -np.inf. Any value less than this one is dropped.
* ``maximum``: Maximum value allowed in a column if the column holds numerical data. By default, the maximum is np.inf. Any value greater than this one is dropped.
* ``regex``: A regular expression that each element of the column must match, if the column holds text data. Any element of the column not matching this regex is dropped.
* ``na_values``: A list of values that are considered as NAs by the pandas parsers.
* ``postprocessors``: A list of callables that called one by one on the columns. Any python function that accepts a series, and returns a series can be a postprocessor.


Here is a more extensive example of the usage of this schema.

.. code-block:: yaml

  iris:
    path: /home/username/src/pysemantic/testdata/iris.csv
    converters:
      Sepal Width: !!python/name:numpy.floor
    column_rules:
      Sepal Length:
        minimum: 2.0
      Petal Length:
        maximum: 4.0
      Petal Width:
        exclude:
          - 3.14
      Species:
        unique_values:
          - setosa
          - versicolor
        postprocessors:
          - !!python/name:module_name.foo

This would cause PySemantic to produce a dataframe corresponding to the Fisher
iris dataset which has the following characteristics:

1. It contains no observations where the sepal length is less than 2 cm.
2. It contains no observations where the petal length is more than 4 cm.
3. The sepal width only contains integers.
4. The petal width column will not contain the specific value 3.14
5. The species column will only contain the values "setosa" and "versicolor", i.e. it will not contain the value "virginica".
6. The species column in the dataframe will be processed by the ``module_name.foo`` function.


------------------------------
DataFrame Schema Configuration
------------------------------

A few rules can also be enforced at the dataframe level, instead of at the
level of individual columns in the dataset. Two of them are:

* ``drop_duplicates`` ([true|false, default true]). This behaves in the same
  way as ``is_drop_duplicates`` for series schema, with the exception that here
  the default is True.
* ``drop_na`` ([true|false, default true]). This behaves in the same
  way as ``is_drop_na`` for series schema, with the exception that here
  the default is True.

Commit message:

FEAT: Support foe explicitly excluding columns
Closes motherbox/pysemantic#23

docs/schema_ref.rst, after:

==============================
Schema Configuration Reference
==============================

Every project in PySemantic can be configured via a data dictionary or a
schema, which is a yaml file. This file houses the details of how PySemantic
should treat a project's constituent datasets. A typical data dictionary
follows the following pattern:

.. code-block:: yaml

  dataset_name:
    dataset_param_1: value1
    dataset_param_2: value2
    # etc

PySemantic reads this as a dictionary where the parameter names are keys and
their values are the values in the dictionary. Thus, the schema for a whole
project is a dictionary of dictionaries.

--------------------------
Basic Schema Configuration
--------------------------

Here is a list of different dataset parameters that PySemantic is sensitive
to:

* ``path`` (Required) The absolute path to the file containing the data. Note that the path must be absolute. This can also be a list of files if the dataset spans multiple files. If that is the case, the path parameter can be specified as:

.. code-block:: yaml

  path:
    - absolulte/path/to/file/1
    - absolulte/path/to/file/2
    # etc

* ``demlimiter`` (Optional, default: ``,``) The delimiter used in the file. This has to be a character delimiter, not words like "comma" or "tab".

* ``md5`` (Optional) The MD5 checksum of the file to read. This necessary
  because sometimes we read files and after processing it, rewrite to the same
  path. This parameter helps keep track of whether the file is correct.

* ``header``: (Optional) The header row of the file.

* ``column_names``: (Optional) Specify the names of columns to use in the
  loaded dataframe. This option can have multiple types of values. It can be:

    1. A list of strings to use as column names:

    .. code-block:: yaml

      column_names:
        - column_1
        - column_2
        - column_3

    2. A dictionary that maps original column names to new ones:

    .. code-block:: yaml

      column_names:
        org_colname_1: new_colname_a
        org_colname_2: new_colname_b
        org_colname_3: new_colname_c

    3. A Python function that translates the name of every column in the loaded
       dataframe:

    .. code-block:: yaml

      column_names: !!python/name:module_name.translate_column_name

* ``nrows``: (Optional) Number of rows to read from the file. If not specified, all rows from the file are read.

* ``use_columns``: (Optional) The list of the columns to read from the dataset. The format for specifying this parameter is as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

    use_columns:
      - column_1
      - column_2
      - column_3

If this parameter is not specified, all columns present in the dataset are read.

* ``exclude_columns``: This option can be used to specify columns that are
  explicityly to be ignored. This is useful when there are large number of
  columns in the dataset and we only wish to exclude a few. Note that this
  option overrides the ``use_columns`` option, i.e. if a column name is present
  in both lists, it will be dropped.

* ``converters``: A dictionary of functions to be applied to columns when loading data. Any Python callable can be added to this list. This parameter makes up the ``converters`` argument of Pandas parsers. The usage is as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

    converters:
      col_a: !!python/name:numpy.int

This results in the ``numpy.int`` function being called on the column ``col_a``

* ``dtypes`` (Optional) Data types of the columns to be read. Since types in Python are native objects, PySemantic expects them to be so in the schema. This can be formatted as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

  dtypes:
    column_name: !!python/name:python_object

For example, if you have three columns named ``foo``, ``bar``, and ``baz``,
which have the types ``string``, ``integer`` and ``float`` respectively, then your schema
should look like:

.. code-block:: yaml

  dtypes:
    foo: !!python/name:__builtin__.str
    bar: !!python/name:__builtin__.int
    baz: !!python/name:__builtin__.float

Non-builtin types can be specified too:

.. code-block:: yaml

   dtypes:
     datetime_column: !!python/name:datetime.date

*Note*: You can figure out the yaml representation of a Python type by doing
the following:

.. code-block:: python

  import yaml
  x = type(foo) # where foo is the object who's type is to be yamlized
  print yaml.dump(x)

* ``combine_dt_columns`` (Optional) Columns containing Date/Time values can be combined into one column by using the following schema:

.. code-block:: yaml

  combine_dt_columns:
    output_col_name:
      - col_a
      - col_b

This will parse columns ``col_a`` and ``col_b`` as datetime columns, and put the result in a column named ``output_col_name``. Specifying the output name is optional. You may declare the schema as:

.. code-block:: yaml

  combine_dt_columns:
    - col_a
    - col_b

In this case the parser will simply name the output column as ``col_a_col_b``, as is the default with Pandas.

*NOTE*: Specifying this column will make PySemantic ignore any columns that have been declared as having the datetime type in the ``dtypes`` parameter.

----------------------------
Column Schema Configuration
----------------------------

PySemantic also allows specifying rules and validators independently for each
column. This can be done using the ``column_rules`` parameter of the dataset
schema. Here is a typical format:

.. code-block:: yaml

  dataset_name:
    column_rules:
      column_1_name:
        # rules to be applied to the column
      column_2_name:
        # rules to be applied to the column

The following parameters can be supplied to any column under ``column_rules``:

* ``is_drop_na`` ([true|false], default false) Setting this to ``true`` causes PySemantic to drop all NA values in the column.
* ``is_drop_duplicates`` ([true|false], default false) Setting this to ``true`` causes PySemantic to drop all duplicated values in the column.
* ``unique_values``: These are the unique values that are expected in a column. The value of this parameter has to be a yaml list. Any value not found in this list will be dropped when cleaning the dataset.
* ``exclude``: These are the values that are to be explicitly excluded from the column. This comes in handy when a column has too many unique values, and a handful of them have to be dropped.
* ``minimum``: Minimum value allowed in a column if the column holds numerical data. By default, the minimum is -np.inf. Any value less than this one is dropped.
* ``maximum``: Maximum value allowed in a column if the column holds numerical data. By default, the maximum is np.inf. Any value greater than this one is dropped.
* ``regex``: A regular expression that each element of the column must match, if the column holds text data. Any element of the column not matching this regex is dropped.
* ``na_values``: A list of values that are considered as NAs by the pandas parsers.
* ``postprocessors``: A list of callables that called one by one on the columns. Any python function that accepts a series, and returns a series can be a postprocessor.


Here is a more extensive example of the usage of this schema.

.. code-block:: yaml

  iris:
    path: /home/username/src/pysemantic/testdata/iris.csv
    converters:
      Sepal Width: !!python/name:numpy.floor
    column_rules:
      Sepal Length:
        minimum: 2.0
      Petal Length:
        maximum: 4.0
      Petal Width:
        exclude:
          - 3.14
      Species:
        unique_values:
          - setosa
          - versicolor
        postprocessors:
          - !!python/name:module_name.foo

This would cause PySemantic to produce a dataframe corresponding to the Fisher
iris dataset which has the following characteristics:

1. It contains no observations where the sepal length is less than 2 cm.
2. It contains no observations where the petal length is more than 4 cm.
3. The sepal width only contains integers.
4. The petal width column will not contain the specific value 3.14
5. The species column will only contain the values "setosa" and "versicolor", i.e. it will not contain the value "virginica".
6. The species column in the dataframe will be processed by the ``module_name.foo`` function.


------------------------------
DataFrame Schema Configuration
------------------------------

A few rules can also be enforced at the dataframe level, instead of at the
level of individual columns in the dataset. Two of them are:

* ``drop_duplicates`` ([true|false, default true]). This behaves in the same
  way as ``is_drop_duplicates`` for series schema, with the exception that here
  the default is True.
* ``drop_na`` ([true|false, default true]). This behaves in the same
  way as ``is_drop_na`` for series schema, with the exception that here
  the default is True.
